Initial support for Terrain SmoothGrid data (#444)
rojo-rbx/rbx-dom: docs/terrain.md

# Roblox Terrain Binary Format

This document describes the Terrain binary format. In this format there is no field for Version, so it is assumed that any future changes will be additions to the existing format or a new format entirely. This specification does not include the adjacent PhysicsGrid binary format, only SmoothGrid.

# Contents

- [Document Conventions](#document-conventions)
- [File Structure](#file-structure)
- [Data Types](#data-types)
  - [Chunk](#chunk)
  - [Voxel](#voxel)
  - [Voxel.Flag](#voxel.flag)
  - [Material](#material)

## Document Conventions

This document assumes a basic understanding of Rust's convention for numeric types. For example:

- `u32` is an unsigned 32-bit integer
- `f32` is a 32-bit floating point number

> All numeric types are little endian. Floats are stored as a dividend of their type's numeric maximum; as such, a `f8` with a value of `0x31` translates to `0x31 / 0xFF`, or `~0.192`. Floats are unsigned. Signed integers are stored with their absolute value, with preceding bytes containing the signedness information; meaning the range for an `i8` is `-0xFF` -> `0xFF`, instead of `-0x7F` to `0x7F`.

Reviewer: The conventions here are a bit confusing. To me, the name `i8` suggests the number is 1 byte, but if the sign is stored in the previous byte, that seems to be 2 bytes. Can you give an example of what that looks like in practice?

Unless otherwise noted, all structs in this document are assumed to be stored with their components in the sequence listed without any modification. That is, if a struct is listed as being composed of an `i32` and an `f32`, it can be assumed that it is stored as an `i32` followed by an `f32`.

## File Structure

The first two bytes of the blob are `0x01`, which is a magic number, followed by `0x05`, which is a logarithm base 2 of the chunk size in voxels. Currently, the chunk size is 32<sup>3</sup> (32768). Values other than `0x05` are untested.

Immediately following the header is an array of chunks, each of which must contain enough voxels to reach the maximum count (32<sup>3</sup>). Chunks are ascendingly ordered by X, then Y, then Z based on their position in the world. Each chunk represents a cube of 128<sup>3</sup> units in world space.

> | Field Name | Format          | Value                                                                 |
> | :--------- | :-------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------- |
> | Header     | `[u8; 2]`       | Magic number and chunk size.                                          |
> | Chunks     | [Chunk](#chunk) | As many chunks as needed to fill the blob. Unknown/no maximum amount. |

Reviewer: I'd prefer the `Header` section be split into two segments:
```suggestion
| Field Name   | Format          | Value                                                                 |
| :----------- | :-------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Magic Number | `u8`            | The magic number `0x01`                                               |
| Chunk Size   | `u8`            | The size of the chunks logarithm base 2. Should be `0x05`.            |
| Chunks       | [Chunk](#chunk) | As many chunks as needed to fill the blob. Unknown/no maximum amount. |
```

Additionally, how is the `Chunks` field sized? Is it just "until the end of the blob" and you can add as many or as few chunks as you want? This should be written down.

## Data Types

Terrain data is represented using a variety of different data types. Data described within them follows any conventions set in the [document conventions](#document-conventions).

### Chunk

> The `Chunk` type is stored with a dynamic size dependent on the size of the voxels contained within, and the end of its data is marked by reaching its maximum voxel count of 32<sup>3</sup>. Voxels are ascendingly ordered by Y, then Z, then X based on their position in the chunk. Voxels are stored in rows of 32 units on each axis, each representing 4 units in world space.

Reviewer: Is the maximum size fixed at 32<sup>3</sup> or is it dynamic based on the size specified in the header? It's unclear here because it says it's dynamically sized but the max value is set in stone.

Author: I'll test it real quick- I have no idea if the engine will overwrite the size in the header, if the game will crash, or what it will do.
32<sup>3</sup> is the default size, and can't be changed by normal means in Studio or any other developer tools

Author: Clarifying that changing from 32^3 / the value of 5 can not be loaded by the engine in new commit

Author: I lied it works above 5, when re-encoding/decoding it normalizes it back to 5/chunk size of 32 though it just splits up the big chunks

> Voxel data is preceded by the offset between this chunk and the last in the blob, or from `0, 0, 0` if this is the first chunk in the blob. This offset is stored using 3 vectors of `(x: u8, y: u8, z: u8)` using the signedness determination described in [document conventions](#document-conventions), with 0xFF values in _all_ unused offsets indicating a negative sign. All coordinates are in chunk space (increments of 1 chunk), not world space.

Reviewer: Reading between the lines, I'm able to work out that the offset is essentially 3 arrays that get added together like `(offset_2_16 * 2^16) + (offset_2_8 * 2^8) + offset`, but it's not clear whether this is correct and it took me thinking about the struct described before to come to this conclusion.

It would be good if it were explicitly spelled out how the offset was stored and how it was converted into that format.

For example, given two chunks, one at a position of `(2, 0, 0)` and another at a position of `(4, 0, -1)` in chunk space, the latter's offset would be stored as follows:

1. (0x00, 0x00, 0xFF)
2. (0x00, 0x00, 0xFF)
3. (0x00, 0x00, 0xFF)

> 4. (0x02, 0x00, 0x01)

Reviewer: It would be cool if there was an explanation of what each of these vectors represented

| Field Name     | Format          | Value                                                                               |
| :------------- | :-------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Signedness     | `[u8; 3]`       | Always the signedness of the following vectors. 0xFF in negative axes.              |
| Offset (65536) | `[i8; 3]`       | Offset from the last chunk in the blob, each axis being multiplied by 65536 chunks. |
| Offset (256)   | `[i8; 3]`       | Offset from the last chunk in the blob, each axis being multiplied by 256 chunks.   |
| Offset (1)     | `[i8; 3]`       | Offset from the last chunk in the blob, each axis being in singular chunks.         |
| Voxels         | [Voxel](#voxel) | As many voxels as needed to fulfill the maximum amount per chunk.                   |

### Voxel

The `Voxel` type is stored with a dynamic size (between 1-4 bytes) dependent on its set [bitflags](#voxel.flag). Only stored within [chunks](#chunk). A reference for the data contained within voxels [can be found here][Terrain.WriteVoxelChannels]. Empty voxels are stored with their material set to Air.

> Voxels are stored within a chunk using [run-length encoding]. A count of `1` would indicate the voxel repeating itself once, meaning 2 of the same voxel in a row would be read when decoded. Occupancy values are stored using the float format described in the [document conventions](#document-conventions).

Reviewer: When you say "run length encoding" do you mean that the size of the `Count` field increases dynamically or is it just a number between 0 and 255? If it's the latter, this is a misuse of the term and it's confusing.

If it's the former, this needs to be rephrased because it suggests to me that the value is just a simple "this voxel repeats between 0 and 255 times".

Author: ```
When you say "run length encoding" do you mean that the size of the Count field increases dynamically or is it just a number between 0 and 255? If it's the latter, this is a misuse of the term and it's confusing.
```
This is like the point of run length encoding though. The count is a number between 0 and 255 determining how long a run length is, AKA, on decode, the voxel repeats itself `count` times and should be read as such, while only taking 2-3 bytes of actual storage space.
```
Run-length encoding (RLE) is a form of [lossless data compression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lossless_data_compression) in which runs of data (consecutive occurrences of the same data value) are stored as a single occurrence of that data value and a count of its consecutive occurrences, rather than as the original run.
```

> Water occupancy was added as an addendum to the existing format for the new [Shorelines] feature release. To avoid restricting the [Voxel.Flag](#voxel.flag)'s `Material Index` field to 5 bits, or rearchitecting the format, run-length encoding is disabled for the current voxel when it has a water occupancy of above `0.0`. Instead, the `Store Count` bit is enabled, and a count of `0` is written. Following the empty count, the water occupancy byte is stored. If a voxel has a solid occupancy of `1.0` (unless the material is Air), the water occupancy should always be `0.0`.

Reviewer: This feels like it could be simplified somewhat. I would like to provide a suggestion, but it's unclear what it means to me. Under what conditions is water occupancy stored? My best guess is it's when `Store Count` is enabled and the count is written as `0`. If this is accurate, I'd write it like this:

```suggestion
Water occupancy is dynamically set based on the `Store Count` flag and the stored `Count` value. If `Store Count` is enabled and `Count` is `0x00`, then the Water Occupancy is written.

If the occupancy of a Voxel is `1.0` and the set material is not `Air`, the water occupancy must always be `0.0` if it's set.
```

| Field Name      | Format                    | Value                                                                                                          |
| :-------------- | :------------------------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Flag            | [Voxel.Flag](#voxel.flag) | Contains the material of this voxel, along with other bitflags.                                                |
| Solid Occupancy | `f8`                      | Occupancy between 0-100% of the set material for this voxel. Only stored if the `Store Occupancy` flag is set. |
| Count           | `u8`                      | Run-length count. Only stored if the `Store Count` flag is set.                                                |

> | Water Occupancy | `f8`                      | Occupancy between 0-100% of Water for this voxel. Only stored based on the conditions described above.         |

Reviewer: I'd love an explanation of occupancy in the context of Terrain voxels, even if it's just "Occupancy represents roughly how full this voxel is as a percentage". It's better to overexplain than underexplain.
